---
layout: post
date: 2018-01-10
category: rust
---
# Rust 2018

There's a call for the community to write what they'd like to see in Rust in the
following year. So, here it goes. And yes, this is a bit personal, what *I*
would like to see in Rust ‒ I fully respect that others have different needs and
that not my every wish need to be granted, because someone else will have a
better idea for sure.

However, I always need to have something special, so I decided I don't want to
just plain list what I'd *like* to see, but what I *wouldn't* like (and also
something about what I already like).

# The already good stuff

Compile times. It might sound strange, but I really don't complain about the
speed of Rust compilation. I work with C++. I've tried Scala. Rust's compile
times are perfectly OK. With incremental compilation, small changes usually get
processed faster than an average C++ build system decides what not to compile.
But sure, if it works even faster, that's great, I won't refuse.

Another thing I find good enough is documentation. Well, more than good enough.
Try using a library like NFQUEUE. You mostly start hunting the Internet for a
piece of code that uses it and hope it does so correctly. If you want to do
something slightly different, you go experimenting and hope the fact it doesn't
crash means *you* do it correctly. Or maybe even Google's gRPC. What would you
guess a method `BuildAndStartServer` does? Yes, of course it builds a server. To
start it, you call `Wait` on it. Isn't that clear? If not, the documentation
won't help you a single bit.

I guess all this may be OK for me, because I come from the rough world of C and
C++, not from Ruby or Python. I can see the compile times are still a bit worse
than what Python offers, most of the time.

And one really great thing. Rust, or the community around it, fully recognizes
it is not just about the syntax of the language, that it is much broader ‒ from
the library ecosystem through tools to actual people. I haven't seen such
concern elsewhere. Usually, a company or other entity just produces a language
and calls it done for the day. Or its committee solves a lot of non-existent
problems (in addition to some of the existing ones), takes ages to do so and
ignores some basic use cases like showing an error message *why* reading a file
failed.

# The things to improve on

There are things that I find a bit annoying and would like if they improved (I
find such things on everything in life).

First, something of a quality assurance about crates. When I pick a library to
perform a goal, it may be a great masterpiece (and there are such available) or
low-quality broken attempt which crashes and is left to rot by the author (these
are available too, possibly even by me). I might want to know if the crate is
not sound. I'd like something more that how nice the name and readme looks to
guess upfront, before using it or trying to read its code. Number of downloads
isn't necessary a valid gauge if the library is for a minor use case.

Second, one practical thing. RLS is a really nice tool in terms of features and
I love it. When it works. Which isn't always. If I open a project, it crashes in
like 50% of times. It would need some work on its reliability and stability (or
maybe some automated test suite, to pick a crate at random, try to issue some
analytical commands on its code, etc).

The third one for me is something I call „eternal RFCs“. Sometimes, an issue is
identified, someone writes an RFC, it is discussed and implemented. And then it
sits there for ever, waiting for stabilization. Sure, some are hard to get right
‒ macros 2.0, generators ‒ and I see why these take so long (it doesn't stop me
from wishing they were stabilized last month already). But there are so many
tiny ones that just seem forgotten ‒ to pick some, `AtomicU8`, `--print
target-spec-json`. I believe it should be possible to set some expiration date
on each RFC and then have it remind itself (by a bot), and make a decision to

 * stabilize
 * prolong the expiration because it is actively being worked on
 * drop it, because nobody cares

And fourth, it would be great if companies started to use Rust more (to have
more Rust jobs, make it economically worthwhile learning it, so we can enjoy our
day jobs more). I think it is inertia in large part (in addition to solvable
problems like private crate registries). If company is using C++, moving to Rust
means teaching everybody a new language, which takes resources and *it isn't the
right time now* (hint: it never is), even if it brings benefits in the long
term. And, switching languages is perceived as risky. For the risk, more
success stories could help (like the one with Firefox's CSS engine). An
incomplete idea, but would it make sense to ask the companies in the „Friends of
rust“, if they could each provide one and collect them? Something to show the
other companies why they want to invest in Rust ‒ something more than 2
sentences or story „We did this great thing… and by the way, we used Rust on the
way“. Something to highlight why it was Rust, how it helped, but also where the
pain was.

# Things not to do

I think Rust should not abandon its goal at being true „systems language“. I use
the term in quotes, because it is so overused these times and nobody really
knows what it means.

There's a lot of new languages these days. Many of them are „just“ Yet Another
Compiled Python. Basically, someone decides to save the world by making the best
language ever. A language that solves all the problem for the programmer. They
end up with a variant of something with garbage collector, reasonably good
performance because it is compiled, pleasurable syntax, package manager and one
little feature that sets it apart *a bit* from the rest. And then decide to call
it „systems language“, because it is good for marketing and everyone wants
system languages these days. And call it safe, because there are no dreaded
pointers directly available. Not that this would be *wrong*. These are OK
languages. They are easy to use. They get the job done. They just don't bring
much new to the game and there's plenty already.

However, I see Rust as unique in a way it doesn't mask the user from the
complexities of a problem. It fully admits that but it arms the user with tools
to make the complexity manageable. The admitting of the complexity puts Rust in
a group of languages of the last resort (but the tools are unique in the group).

What I mean, when you're choosing a language, you may do it based on how many
programmers around you know it, how much you like it, how easy it is to use, if
it has the right libraries, or if you just like its logo. Most of the time, you
have literally hundreds of possibilities. But sometimes, the problem chooses for
you and you have to pick from C or C++. Or now Rust. And that's it.

I believe it is important for Rust to stay in that group of languages and not
become Yet Another Compiled Python, we have plenty of those. We just have very
few of the last resort ones. And I mean it even if it means Rust isn't as
pleasurable or easy to use (the others in the group aren't either). I don't mean
to say Rust should *aim* to be hard to use. It's great Rust tries not to
compromise and wants to *just do both at the same time*. But I still consider
the possibilities of use for all types of problems more important. If someone
can afford to use Go or Swift and doesn't want to use Rust because it is more
complex (or because a gopher is *obviously* much cuter than a cogwheel), good
for them ‒ there's a place for more than one language in the world.
